["Toreador song - Aria of the hot spring
manners" playing in Italian]
["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
[hawk cries]
[ominous music]
You know, I'd kill for a bath.
Same here.
[Hadrian]
Come take a look at this, General Severus.
[Severus] Yes, sir. Pardon my intrusion.
[Severus scoffs] How insolent!
What sort of miscreant would dare to
defile your majesty's face in such a way?
Truly.
"The second year
of the new state of Israel,"
that's what it says.
Three years have gone by
since the beginning of this rebellion.
Three whole years…
No matter what I say,
these people seem intent
on ignoring me completely.
This places stands as a hub
for trade and commerce around the globe.
The value it holds for the Roman Empire
is simply unmatched.
Yes, of course, your majesty,
which is why we tried to build
the new city of Aelia Capitolina here
to demonstrate just that.
If only I knew that this cause
would result in this prolonged conflict.
[groans]
This is just utterly despicable!
[grunts]
I am no longer the spry young lad
I once was in my youth.
It's enough to drive a man mad,
the thought of wasting my last moments
on these pithy wars, General Severus.
[exhales] Worry not, your majesty.
On this day, eight separate divisions
from all around the empire
are converging at this very location.
It is but a matter of time
until Jerusalem falls.
Even Sir Apollodorus has lent us his aid.
The ballista he created
show great promise.
-[ballista firing]
-[soldiers groaning]
[horses neighs]
-[triumphant music]
-[scoffs] Apollodorus is older than I.
I had thought
he'd be on his way out by now.
He's still very much reliable
and remains an excellent designer.
I'm going to be counting on you as well.
Your words humble me, sir.
Have a drink.
Thank you, your majesty.
[Severus clears throat]
By the way, what is the status
of those soldiers who were poisoned
by wines from the enemy?
Have they shown any signs of recovery?
Yes, there are some
who are still afflicted
by severe stomach pains and nausea.
Though from what they tell me,
above all else,
what they truly wish for is a nice bath.
A weakened body is a cold one after all.
A bath, huh…
[coughs]
Emperor Hadrian?
-I fear I have reached my limit.
-[Severus gasps]
A life without bathing
is simply unimaginable.
Yes, I agree with you, sir.
Surely the soldiers strength would return
if only they were given the opportunity
to have a bath.
Hmm.
But your majesty,
in a place of rocks and dirt such as this,
how would…
Actually, a bathhouse is being constructed
and shall be ready shortly.
My gods.
A thermae out here?
Mm hmm. Yes, believe it.
I've brought a very talented designer
from Rome with me.
[Hadrian] He's already located
a spring for the water source
and construction of the bath is underway.
As expected of your majesty,
nothing slips by your consideration.
Bathing is the source
of a true Roman's power.
Once it's ready, you too should ease
your fatigue by bathing in our thermae.
I am most thankful, your majesty.
[Hadrian] Lucius, my boy…
your people are waiting for you.
[Lucius grunts]
[panting]
We'll be arriving shortly, Apollodorus.
Sorry to trouble you like this, Lucius.
Please don't worry,
it's no trouble at all.
[Apollodorus]
He was such a weak little boy…
[gentle percussive music]
My, you've grown into a fine man
and you're also the most prominent
bathhouse designer in Rome.
Please, spare me the reminiscing.
It's true, time is quick to pass you by
and it seems to me
like you have spent it wisely.
[chuckles]
I wish with all of my heart
that Cassius could see the man
that you've grown into.
I just know he'd be relieved
to know that he had someone like you
succeeding him.
[clanking, rattling]
Hey,
grab that rock and bring it to the pile.
[gentle uplifting music]
-Alright, we're here.
-Oh, wow.
It just needs a bit more work
until it's finished.
What do you say we start helping out and…
Oh…
This is…
Why, the very ground is warm to the touch.
[Lucius] Yes, all of the rocks in this
area are being heated by the earth.
Hmm.
Down we go.
That warmth is just
what the doctor ordered.
Do yourself a favor and join me.
Instead of lying on that scraggly rock,
wouldn't you rather come relax
over in the bath?
[Apollodorus chuckles]
You're right. That is why
I had you carry me all the way out here
in the first place.
[gentle percussive music]
[grunting softly]
[Lucius] Your progress on this
is way behind schedule.
My apologies, sir. There's not much
we can do with this number of people.
Alright, I understand. I'll help out too.
You just need someone
to move these rocks aside, correct?
Yeah, but hold on,
you can't do it by yourself.
Nay, there's nothing for you
to worry about.
Lifting a few pebbles is child's play.
[cracking sound]
-[groans]
-[thunder crashes]
-[lighthearted music]
-Are you okay over there?
[groaning] My back, all of a sudden…
Are you injured?
Nay,
I just need to rest for a moment is all.
[Lucius] How pathetic I must appear.
Right when
we're falling behind schedule too.
My age is catching up to me.
Maybe I've been
carrying Apollodorus around too much.
Huh? Apollodorus?
Have you seen Sir Apollodorus
around anywhere?
Huh? Wait, wasn't he just here?
Could've sworn I saw him
a few seconds ago.
Where could…
If you're looking for me, I'm over here!
[Apollodorus laughs]
This special bath of yours
feels like heaven!
[gasps] Sir Apollodorus!
The water's deep there, it's dangerous!
-[cracking sound]
-[groaning in pain]
[birds chirping]
[water trickling]
[woman] My legs were wobbling fierce.
The doctor couldn't do nothing,
so I came here and now I can walk again.
Who needs doctors
when you got hot springs?
Well, hey there, you two.
You all want to help me skin
and eat these bamboo shoots?
Ooh, don't mind if I do.
I bet if you boil them,
they'll taste wonderful.
I worked up a sweat,
so I'm gonna go wash off.
Oh hey, didn't know you were up and about.
-Can you make it there by yourself?
-Yeah, I'm fine.
I'm all healed and can walk
on my own two feet. [chuckles]
Well, alrighty then. Take care, you hear.
MEN'S BATH
[man humming]
Huh?
Hey, we've got a man ass up
in the water over here!
-[lighthearted music]
-Oh dear! Is the poor fellow dead?
[shouting] Hey, someone!
Hey, someone come help! [gasping]
[grunting softly]
-Ah, thank goodness he's up.
-He's alive. What a relief.
Take it easy there, bud.
I found you passed out in the water.
That's right.
[Lucius] If I remember correctly,
I was trying to get to Apollodorus
when I slipped and fell.
[woman]
Come now, lie down and rest for a spell.
[Lucius] I don't remember
what happened after that. But…
it appears that I have woken up here
in the world of the flat faces again.
Can you understand Japanese?
Hmm.
Where am I?
Is this place
some sort of military barracks?
Are all of these sleeping people
wounded soldiers?
[wind blowing]
[Lucius] Hmm.
Is that the faint scent of hot springs
in the air?
Could there be one nearby?
[woman] Here you go.
Have a drink of some yogurt.
Go on now, drink up.
I get the feeling this guy has no idea
what you're saying.
-[bone cracks]
-[groaning in pain]
Hey, didn't we tell you to take it easy?
[woman] Just rest up a bit more.
Guess he doesn't know how to wind down
after a bath, huh?
[man] That's for sure. Well, regardless,
if he stays put here for a little while,
I'm sure he'll be just fine.
Our underfloor ondol heating
is the best in Japan.
[Lucius] Nothing for it.
I'll rest for a bit
and then begin my investigation.
Hmm?
My, the floor here is quite warm.
[man] And down we go.
[sighs]
I've never been there
but this feels like heaven.
[Lucius]
Have these people gathered together here
to sleep on the warm floor? Hmm.
Why is it warm anyway?
That reminds me,
Apollodorus said it felt like heaven
when lying against that rock.
The earth's heat!
Whoa there,
pal, you sure don't stay still.
-[gentle uplifting music]
-Take a load off and relax, it'll be okay.
They constructed this hut
on top of a heated ground?
[man] Hey, hey, wait a sec, bucko,
don't pull that up!
If you want the heat to do its job,
you gotta just lay back
and empty your mind.
Go ahead, let it all go.
[grunts]
Yeah, there you are. I get that
all these new things are weird to you,
but give it some time and
you'll be used to them before you know it.
Just got to give it
the good old college try.
It's strange but the circulation
of my blood has improved
and my aching back
feels much better than before.
[man] Hey, Yosaku.
How are you holding up, man? Doing okay?
Looks to me like you're getting better.
[sighs]
[grunts]
Dang, bud, you're up again?
[Lucius] Who is this man?
His body carries the scars
of someone who's seen countless battles.
See that guy over there?
He got in a terrible truck accident
and his bones got broken pretty badly.
But ever since he started coming here,
he's been able to walk again.
There's no doubt in my mind
that he's a fully fledged centurion.
My feet on the other hand are different.
See here? They're like this.
Still got a bolt in there.
Hot water does wonders,
even for stuff like this.
[sighs] The heating helps to get your
blood pumping a little better as well.
Now quit your ruminating
and lay back down,
your body needs rest to get better.
So they're all wounded veterans?
[coughing]
But wait.
At a closer look, that doesn't seem
to be the case for everyone here.
[man chuckles]
So, perhaps this healing hut
is for those with some sort of infirmity
to congregate.
[man] Yeah, that feels nice.
And if that's true,
it must mean that this geothermal energy
in the hot spring
possess the ability to heal wounds
and even disease.
Hey there, Mr. Foreigner. I boiled up
these bamboo shoots, want some?
-[gentle music]
-Leave him be.
Don't you know
foreigners won't eat that kind of stuff?
You think so?
[gasps]
[Lucius] This intense scent…
[sniffs]
It's garum fish sauce!
Hey now, you don't have to eat it
if you don't wanna.
[woman chuckles softly]
[Lucius] Truly the flavor of Rome.
I haven't eaten something so delectable
in ages.
Well, I'll be, even shottsuru sauce
doesn't faze this guy.
Have all you want.
Don't scarf them down so fast,
you'll get a stomach ache.
[grunts softly]
You need raw sake
if you're gonna eat fish sauce like that.
Wow, thanks a lot.
But do you really think a foreigner
can appreciate the rich taste of raw sake?
Might be too much for him.
Well, it can't hurt. Try it.
Pound it down quickly, you hear?
[Lucius] If this man is recommending it
to me, I can't well turn it down, can I?
-So, what do you think?
-Is it good?
[grunting, groaning]
[retching]
[suspenseful music]
Poison. They served me poison!
That reminds me,
there's been
a number of incidents recently
where Roman soldiers at camp
were served wine poison by the enemy.
So tell me, I of all people
somehow let my guard down
around the traitorous rebels!
-[soldier] Move out!
-[Lucius] Called up from their towns,
the Roman soldiers head for the camps.
And when the time comes,
they fight as soldiers.
That I, a lone designer,
makes the journey to craft them
a wondrous bathhouse.
However, without the bathhouse,
it would be difficult for the soldiers
to get their vital rest
and ease their fatigue.
It's that very fact
that is the Roman army's hidden weakness.
Could it be that this man
knows that weakness
and is trying to exploit it by killing me?
[sniffs, groans] Damn, my bad.
This sake must have gone bad years ago.
Hold on, give it here.
[sniffs] Oh boy! You're a real jerk,
this stuff is totally rotten!
I'm sorry, I had no idea.
DRINKABLE HOT SPRING
Here, I brought you some spring water.
One drink of this
ought to fix you right up. Take it.
[coughs]
[in Roman]
What is this? What's this salty water?
Whoa, calm down there, buddy.
It ain't gonna kill you.
[in Roman] I won't let you have your way
by killing me!
Hey now, cool your jets. It's just water.
[growls]
Yeah, alright.
How are you feeling down there?
You okay? Stomach feeling better?
[Lucius] I… I feel better.
[gentle music]
This special water's from a spring
that has tons of sodium.
It's like an antidote and it'd cure
almost anything. You want some more, pal?
[Lucius] I see now.
So they're having me drink the water
from this spring.
It appears to be full of salt,
just like the spring water in Jerusalem.
So drinking the water
has benefits as well.
Hey, I'm mighty sorry, sir.
Please forgive me.
[gentle music ends]
[chuckles]
MEN'S BATH
-[gentle music]
-[Lucius and old man sigh of relief]
[old man chuckles] What a day.
I sure am glad we're able
to get that all sorted out.
[laughs]
When I found you upside down in the bath,
I nearly jumped out of my skin.
I really didn't mean
to give you that nasty old sake.
I'll give you the good stuff later.
Wait, what?
That's strange.
Hey, what's the matter?
That guy just disappeared.
Oh geez. He ain't drowning again, is he?
[birds calling]
A toast to the fall of Jerusalem!
[cheering]
[man] We can finally go back to Rome.
And what about this miracle water
that fixed our stomachs? Let's hear it.
Oh yeah, and we should go check out
that ground heated room later too.
This heated floor really gets you feeling
all warm and fuzzy, huh?
What an amazing idea.
[sighs]
[grunting softly]
Wonderful. This feels fantastic.
[triumphant music]
[Severus] Ah, your majesty.
How was the bath?
Great. I'd even say it was divine.
I'm glad to see the soldiers' morale
improving as well.
Everyone seems to think
this was all your majesty's doing.
-Lucius.
-Yes, sir.
The only way to describe your work here
is magnificent.
Sir, thank you for your kind words,
I'm truly honored.
We have successfully taken Jerusalem
thanks in no small part to the relaxing
properties that your baths provide.
Yes, I shall reward you handsomely.
You flatter me but it's not necessary.
I did nothing so grand
to deserve this generous praise.
What a humble man.
I believe it's clear to see why your
majesty hold him in such high regard.
Lucius Modestus.
Yes?
I want to hire you.
Please come to work for me
as my personal designer.
Yes. I humbly accept, your majesty.
Good. I'll be counting on you.
Right.
But if I may, there is one thing
I must ask of you.
Whatever you desire.
[Lucius] My wife has been awaiting
my return for three years now.
If it's no trouble, might I return to Rome
for a brief reprieve?
Livia…
The emperor has blessed me
with the most gracious reward.
I wonder if she'll appreciate it.
[triumphant music ends]
[male narrator]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
In continuation from the previous episode,
author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
is touring around Shima Onsen.
She visited the bath at Sekizenkan,
which was established
during the Genroku era.
SHIMANE ONSEN SEKIZENKAN
Wow, this is amazing.
-[soft pensive music]
-[gasps]
-This is incredible.
-Thank you.
[Mari]
This building has a foreign feel to it.
In ancient Rome,
all of the windows in the bathhouses
-were designed with an arch.
-I see.
[Mari] It's called the thermae style.
The shape of the bathhouse window
that was passed down
for generations in Rome
is being used here as well.
-May I touch it? I actually want to go in.
-Go ahead.
It's so warm.
Is this straight from the source?
-Yes, but the temperature is lowered.
-I see, it's adjusted.
-Wow, look at this buildup.
-Yeah.
-It's so cool.
-If you twist it,
the hot spring water will come out.
-It looks like icing on a cake.
-Yeah.
-This probably won't twist anymore.
-It's stuck in place now.
-It won't move.
-Hot water used to come out.
I see. Where is the water coming from now?
From down below. You see it bubbling?
-You're right.
-It's bubbling.
-[gentle flute music]
-I've been curious about that door.
-It's a sauna.
-A sauna?
It's a small room filled with
-steam from the hot spring.
-It's so hot.
When you open the door…
Oh wow!
This is a Greco-Roman style.
This is from that era.
[man] It almost feels like
Lucius will come out of here.
Yes. I think the Romans
will walk in here normally.
And these tiles are mosaic too.
It's so nice.
These things really transcend
time and countries.
I get crazy ideas for my comics,
because these things exist.
It makes me wonder
if the Romans were here.
I see. The sauna
is how the bath originated.
Yes. This is how it originated.
This led to the bath.
-That's right.
-There's so much at Shima Onsen.
The history of hot springs
is condensed in this one spot.
Thank you.
There'd be no problem, even if someone
time slips here from the past.
-I agree.
-Yes.
-[lively shamisen music]
-[male narrator] Thermae memory.
Ms. Yamazaki sketched
a memorable moment from this trip.
Many things stood out to me,
but that sauna is exactly
how the sauna looked like
in ancient Greece and Rome.
It makes you wonder why
something like that
exists in Japan at Shima Onsen.
So even if Lucius came here, he'd go there
without missing a beat,
and enjoy his time in the sauna.
[male narrator]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
What kind of adventure awaits us
next time?
Ms. Yamazaki's journey will continue.
[gentle uplifting music]